---
layout: post
title: Philippa Foot, “The Problem of Abortion and the Doctrine of the Double Effect”
module: "Now, theories"
---

**Axiological theories of right**: The deontic status of an action is fully and directly grounded in its value.

- Analogy: H & O atoms make up H<sub>2</sub>O molecules which in turn make up the water in my bottle.
  - Direct grounds: To say that the water in my bottle are made of H<sub>2</sub>O is not deny that it is further made of hydrogen and oxygen atoms.
  - Full grounds: No other molecules make up the water in my bottle.

- *Consequentialism*: The deontic status of an action is grounded fully and directly in the value of its consequences.

**Deontological theories of right**: The deontic status of an action is not fully and directly grounded in its value.

- Possibilities:
  - Denying full grounds: Either considerations of value do not matter at all or other considerations also matter morally. 
  - Denying direct grounds: Either considerations of value do not matter at all or they matter only indirectly.
- The defining deontological objection: At least sometimes, two axiologically identical actions may differ in deontic status.

## The “sacrifice one to save five” pairs of cases

<style type="text/css">
.tg  {border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;}
.tg td{border-color:black;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;
  overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg th{border-color:black;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;
  font-weight:normal;overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg .tg-0pky{border-color:inherit;text-align:left;vertical-align:top}
.tg .tg-0lax{text-align:left;vertical-align:top}
</style>
<table class="tg"><thead>
  <tr>
    <th class="tg-0pky"></th>
    <th class="tg-0pky">Case</th>
    <th class="tg-0pky">Intuition</th>
  </tr></thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0pky" rowspan="2">Part I</td>
    <td class="tg-0pky"><span style="font-weight:400;font-style:normal;text-decoration:none">Drug</span>: <span style="font-weight:400;font-style:normal;text-decoration:none">Giving a lifesaving drug to one vs five [who each need 1/5]</span></td>
    <td class="tg-0pky">Right</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0pky">Serum: Killing one to make a serum to save five</td>
    <td class="tg-0pky">Wrong</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0pky" rowspan="2">Part II</td>
    <td class="tg-0pky">Runaway trolley (driver ver.): Diverting the trolley from five, hitting one</td>
    <td class="tg-0pky">Right</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Blackmail: Executing one innocent person to save five</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Wrong</td>
  </tr>
</tbody></table>

An adequate moral theory should either explain or explain away this pattern.

- The deontological objection: Axiological theories in general and consequentialist theories in particular cannot.
  - *In-class activity*: What can a consequentialist say for themself?
- Motivation for a *deontological constraint*: What matters morally is not just how good the consequences are, but the ways in which these consequences are brought about.

## Two competing explanations

- The Doctrine of the Double Effect: It is at least sometimes morally permissible to bring about bad consequences if they are *merely foreseen* rather than *intended*.
  - Intended consequences are aimed at either as the agent’s end or as a means to the agent’s end (either way: they are part of the plan); merely foreseen consequences are not so intended.
  - Example: Going to class on a rainy day.
    - Intended/part of the plan:
      - End: Arriving at the classroom.
      - Means to the end: Getting on the 1 train, climbing stairs, etc.
    - Merely foreseen/not part of the plan:
      - Getting my clothes wet, scanning ID to enter campus (!), etc.
  - Pair I: The death of the one patient is intended in the serum case but not in the drug case.
  - Pari II: The death of the innocent person is intended in the blackmail case but not in the trolley (driver) case.
- A distinction between *doing* and *allowing* harm: “To refrain from inflicting injury ourselves is a stricter duty than to prevent other people from inflicting injury, which is not to say that the other is not a very strict duty indeed” (p. 13).
  - Allowing harm is refraining from preventing harm (“letting die”); doing harm is bringing about harm (“killing”).
  - Not the intending/merely foreseeing distinction; also not the act/omission distinction.

<style type="text/css">
.tg  {border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;}
.tg td{border-color:black;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;
  overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg th{border-color:black;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;
  font-weight:normal;overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg .tg-0lax{text-align:left;vertical-align:top}
</style>
<table class="tg"><thead>
  <tr>
    <th class="tg-0lax"></th>
    <th class="tg-0lax">Intending harm</th>
    <th class="tg-0lax">Merely foreseeing harm</th>
  </tr></thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Doing harm</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Serum &amp; blackmail cases</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Lethal dose of morphine to terminal patient</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Allowing harm</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Murder by letting drown (i.e., “bathtub” case)</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Drug &amp; trolley driver cases</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<style type="text/css">
.tg  {border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;}
.tg td{border-color:black;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;
  overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg th{border-color:black;border-style:solid;border-width:1px;
  font-weight:normal;overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg .tg-0lax{text-align:left;vertical-align:top}
</style>
<table class="tg"><thead>
  <tr>
    <th class="tg-0lax"></th>
    <th class="tg-0lax">Act</th>
    <th class="tg-0lax">Omission</th>
  </tr></thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Doing harm</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Making vaccines inaccessible</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Not providing medical care for trans patients</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Allowing harm</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Withdrawing treatment (e.g., “pulling the plug”)</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Withholding treatment (e.g., non-resuscitation)</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Foot’s argument against double effect

The lethal fumes case (p. 13): Manufacture lifesaving gas to save five, releasing lethal gas killing one.

- The death of the one is not part of the plan/not a means to saving the five it is a merely foreseen consequence.
- Even though you merely foresee that the one patient will die, you bring about their death.