---
layout: post
title: Judith Thomson Canonizing the Trolley Problem
module: "Now, theories"
---

The trolley problem as depicted in *The Good Place*, [S2E6](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DtRhrfhP5b4).

## The trolley problem

- Narrowly: Why is it permissible to divert the trolley in the Bystander case?
- Broadly: None of the views we’ve discussed so far survives the trolley cases.

## A few variants I’d like us to focus on

- Driver: As the driver, you can divert onto another track, killing one, or stay on the current track, killing five.
- Bystander: The driver cannot act, but you are a bystander who can pull a switch to divert the runaway trolley.
- Footbridge: The driver cannot act, but you are a bystander who can push a “fat man” down a bridge to stop the runaway trolley, killing him.
  - Thomson’s proposal: Acting on the threat vs. the person.
- Two Trolleys: The driver cannot act, but you are a bystander who can pull a switch to divert the runaway trolley. Except the switch also diverts a second trolley, killing one.

<style type="text/css">
.tg  {border-collapse:collapse;border-spacing:0;}
.tg td{border-style:solid;border-width:1px;
  overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg th{border-style:solid;border-width:1px;
  font-weight:normal;overflow:hidden;padding:10px 5px;word-break:normal;}
.tg .tg-1wig{font-weight:bold;text-align:left;vertical-align:top}
.tg .tg-c3ow{border-color:inherit;text-align:center;vertical-align:top}
.tg .tg-0lax{text-align:left;vertical-align:top}
.tg .tg-0pky{border-color:inherit;text-align:left;vertical-align:top}
</style>
<table class="tg"><thead>
  <tr>
    <th class="tg-c3ow">Variant</th>
    <th class="tg-0lax">Intuition</th>
    <th class="tg-c3ow">Utilitarianism</th>
    <th class="tg-c3ow">Intending/Merely Foressing</th>
    <th class="tg-0lax">Doing/Allowing</th>
    <th class="tg-0lax">Threat/Person</th>
  </tr></thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0pky">Driver</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Divert</td>
    <td class="tg-0pky">Divert</td>
    <td class="tg-0pky">Divert</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Divert</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Divert</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0pky"><span style="font-weight:400;font-style:normal;text-decoration:none">Bystander</span></td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Divert</td>
    <td class="tg-0pky">Divert</td>
    <td class="tg-0pky">Divert</td>
    <td class="tg-1wig">Don’t divert</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Divert</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Footbridge</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Don’t push</td>
    <td class="tg-1wig">Push</td>
    <td class="tg-1wig">Don’t push?</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Don’t push</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Don’t push</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Two Trolleys</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Don’t divert?</td>
    <td class="tg-1wig">Divert</td>
    <td class="tg-1wig">Divert</td>
    <td class="tg-0lax">Don’t divert</td>
    <td class="tg-1wig">Divert?</td>
  </tr>
</tbody></table>


## Could you permissibly divert in the original Bystander case?

Three Tracks: The driver cannot act, and you are not merely a bystander—you are on a second side track. This gives you the option to switch the trolley onto your track, killing yourself.

- If you wouldn’t do this: Could you permissible do what you wouldn't do to yourself to the one in the original Bystander case?
- If you would do this: This has to be supererogatory? Could you impose it onto somebody else?

